



From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

(Redirected from Indian Literature)
Indian regional literature
For the journal, see Indian Literature (journal).
This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article includes a list of general references, but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: Vaguely discursive prose without significant analysis or commentary, Cryptic references. Please help improve this article if you can. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


Part of a series on theCulture of India
Society
Indians
Folklore
History
Languages
Holidays
Religion

Arts and literature
Art
Architecture
Cinema
Dance
Festivals
Literature
Poetry
Music
Painting
Sculpture
Theatre

Others
Cuisine
Media
Newspapers
Radio
Television
Sports
Traditional
Video games
Fashion
Mythology
Hindu
Vedic
Meitei
Buddhist
Folklore

Symbols
Flag
State Emblem
Anthem
Miss India
World Heritage Sites
Monuments

Organizations
Ministry of Culture
Ministry of Tourism
Tourism
Museums
Incredible India

 India portalvte
Indian literature
Ancient
Ancient Meitei
Pali
Prakrit
Sanskrit
Tamil
Tamil Sangam
Vedic Sanskrit

Early Medieval
Kannada (Extinct Kannada)
Malayalam
Odia
Telugu

Medieval to early Modern
Assamese
Awadhi
Bengali
Braj
Bhojpuri
English
Gujarati
Hindi
Kashmiri
Kokborok
Konkani
Maithili
Marathi
Meitei
Mizo
Nepali
Punjabi
Rajasthani
Sindhi
Urdu
vte
History of literatureby era
Ancient (corpora)
Bronze Age
Sumerian
Ancient Egyptian
Akkadian
Ugarit
Hittite
Classical
Classical Chinese
Aramaic
Ancient Greek
Ancient Hebrew
Classical Latin
Ancient Meitei
Syriac
Prakrit
Tamil Sangam
Classical Sanskrit

Early Medieval
Telugu
Kannada
New Persian
Pali
Armenian
Byzantine Greek
Welsh
Old English
Georgian
Old German
Japanese
Old Turkic
Arabic
Norse
Bulgarian

Medieval by century
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th

Early Modern by century
15th
16th
17th

Modern by century
18th
19th

Contemporary by century
20th
21st

 Literature portalvte
Indian literature refers to the literature produced on the Indian subcontinent until 1947 and in the Republic of India thereafter. The Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India has 22 officially recognised languages. Sahitya Akademi, India's highest literary body, also has 24 recognised literary languages.
The earliest works of Indian literature were orally transmitted. Sanskrit literature begins with the oral literature of the Rig Veda, a collection of literature dating to the period 1500–1200 BCE. The Sanskrit epics Ramayana and Mahabharata were subsequently codified and appeared towards the end of the 2nd millennium BCE. Classical Sanskrit literature developed rapidly during the first few centuries of the first millennium BCE,[1] as did  the Pāli Canon and Tamil Sangam literature.[citation needed][verification needed] Ancient Meitei appeared in the 1st century CE with sacred musical compositions like the Ougri,[2] and heroic narratives like the Numit Kappa.[3] 
In the medieval period, literature in Kannada and Telugu appeared in the 9th and 10th centuries respectively.[4] Later, literature in Marathi, Gujarati, Bengali, Assamese, Odia,  and Maithili appeared. Thereafter literature in various dialects of Hindi, Persian and Urdu began to appear as well. In 1913, Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore became India's first Nobel laureate in literature.[citation needed][verification needed]


In archaic Indian languages[edit]
History of literatureby region or country
General topics

Basic topics
Literary terms
Criticism
Theory
World literature

Types
Epic
Novel
Poetry
Prose
Romance

Lists
Books
Authors


Middle Eastern
Ancient
Sumerian
Babylonian
Hebrew
Pahlavi
Persian
Arabic
Israeli

European

Greek
Latin
Early Medieval
Matter of Rome
Matter of France
Matter of Britain
Medieval
Renaissance

Modern
Structuralism
Poststructuralism
Deconstruction
Modernism
Postmodernism
Post-colonialism
Hypertexts


North and South American

American
Canadian
Jamaican

Latin American
Argentine
Brazilian
Colombian
Cuban
Mexican
Peruvian


Oceanian
Australian
New Zealand

Asian

East
Chinese
Japanese
Korean
Mongolian

Southeast
Burmese
Philippine
Thai
Vietnamese

South
Ancient Meitei
Telugu
Tamil
Sanskrit
Indian
Pakistani
Assamese
Bengali
Gujarati
Hindi
Kannada
Kashmiri
Malayalam
Marathi
Modern Meitei
Nepali
Rajasthani
Sindhi
Urdu
Indian writing in English


African

North
Egyptian
Ancient Egyptian
Moroccan

Sub-Saharan
Nigerian
South African
Swahili


Related topics
History of science fiction
List of years in literature
Literature by country
History of theatre
History of ideas
Intellectual history

 Literature portalvte
Sanskrit literature[edit]
Vedic literature[edit]
Main article: Vedas
Examples of early works written in Vedic Sanskrit include, the core Vedas and Upanishads. Other examples include the Sulba Sutras, which are some of the earliest texts on geometry.[citation needed][verification needed]

Epic Sanskrit literature[edit]
Main article: Indian epic poetry
Ved Vyasa's Mahabharata and Valmiki's Ramayana, written in Epic Sanskrit, are regarded as the greatest Sanskrit epics.[citation needed][verification needed]

Classical Sanskrit literature[edit]
Main article: Sanskrit literature
The famous poet and playwright Kālidāsa wrote one epic: Raghuvamsha (Dynasty of Raghu); it was written in Classical Sanskrit rather than Epic Sanskrit. Other examples of works written in Classical Sanskrit include the Pāṇini's Ashtadhyayi, which standardised the grammar and phonetics of Classical Sanskrit. The Laws of Manu (मनुस्मृति) is a famous text in Hinduism. Kālidāsa is often considered to be the greatest playwright in Sanskrit literature and one of the greatest poets in Sanskrit literature; his Recognition of Shakuntala (अभिज्ञानशाकुन्तलम्) and Meghaduuta are Kalidasa's most famous play and poem respectively. Other famous plays include Mricchakatika by Shudraka, Svapna Vasavadattam by Bhasa, and Ratnavali by Sri Harsha. Later poetic works include Gita Govinda by Jayadeva. Some other famous works are Chanakya's Arthashastra and Vatsyayana's Kamasutra.[citation needed][verification needed]

Ancient Meitei literature[edit]
Main article: Ancient Meitei literature


"The beginning of this old Manipuri literature (as in the case of Newari) may go back to 1500 years, or even 2000 years, from now."[5]


—Suniti Kumar Chatterji, Padma Vibhushan awardee Indian scholar


Some of the ancient literature of Meitei language (also known as Manipuri language) include the Ougri (c. 1st century CE musical composition),[6] the Numit Kappa (c. 1st century CE narrative work),[7] the Poireiton Khunthok (c. 3rd century CE narrative work),[8] the Khencho (pre-7th century CE musical composition),[9] 6th-7th century CE copper plate inscriptions of king Khongtekcha,[10] the Panthoibi Khonggul (c. 8th century CE narrative work),[11] the Loiyumpa Silyel (c. Written Constitution drafted in 429 CE, and finalised in 11th-12th century CE), etc.[12]

Prakrit literature[edit]
Many of Aśvaghoṣa's plays were written in Shauraseni as were a sizable number of Jain works and Rajasekhara's Karpuramanjari. Canto 13 of the Bhaṭṭikāvya[13] is written in what is called "like the vernacular" (bhāṣāsama), that is, it can be read in two languages simultaneously: Prakrit and Sanskrit.[14]

Pali literature[edit]
Main articles: Pali Canon and Pali literature
The canonical Pali literature includes Buddhist discourses (suttas), Abhidharma works, poetry, works on monastic discipline (vinaya), and the Jataka tales.[citation needed][verification needed]

Tamil Sangam literature[edit]
Main article: Sangam literature
The Sangam literature (Tamil: சங்க இலக்கியம், Sanga ilakkiyam) is the ancient Tamil literature of the period in the history of south India (known as the Thamizhagam or the Tamilagam) spanning from c. 300 BCE to 300 CE (Akananuru (1, 15, 31, 55, 61, 65, 91, 97, 101, 115, 127, 187, 197, 201, 211, 233, 251, 265, 281, 311, 325, 331, 347, 349, 359, 393, 281, 295), Kurunthogai (11), Natrinai (14, 75) are dated before 300 BCE).[15][16][17][18][19] This collection contains 2381 poems in Tamil composed by 473 poets, some 102 of whom remain anonymous.[20]
Most of the available Sangam literature is from the Third Sangam,[21] this period is known as the Sangam period, which refers to the prevalent Sangam legends claiming literary academies lasting thousands of years, giving the name to the corpus of literature.[22][23][24] The Only religious poems among the shorter poems occur in paripaatal. The rest of the corpus of Sangam literature deals with human relationship and emotions.[25]
Sangam literature deals with emotional and material topics such as love, war, governance, trade and bereavement.[26] Some of the greatest Tamil scholars, like Thiruvalluvar, who wrote on ethics, and on the various issues of life like virtue, wealth and love, or the Tamil poet Mamulanar, who explored historical incidents that happened in India, lived during the Sangam period.[27][28]

In modern Indian languages [edit]
Sahitya Akademi recognised & scheduled languages[edit]
Further information: Sahitya Akademi § Recognised literary languages, and Scheduled languages of India
Assamese literature[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Main article: Assamese literature
See also: Category:Assamese-language books, Buranjis, and Assamese poetry
Lakshminath Bezbaroa, Assamese poet, novelist and playwright of modern Assamese literature
The Buddhist Charyapadas are often cited as the earliest example of Assamese literature. The Charyapadas are Vajrayana Buddhist songs composed in the 8th to 12th centuries.[29][30] These writings bear similarities to Oriya and Bengali languages as well. The phonological and morphological traits of these songs, some of which are extant, bear very strong resemblance to Assamese.[citation needed][verification needed]
A comprehensive introductory book Assamese Language-Literature & Sahityarathi Lakshminath Bezbaroa originally authored by leading Assamese littérateur of Awahon-Ramdhenu Era and pioneer Assam economist Bhabananda Deka together with his three deputies, Parikshit Hazarika, Upendra Nath Goswami and Prabhat Chandra Sarma, was published in 1968. This book was officially released in New Delhi on 24 Nov 1968 by then President of India Zakir Husain in commemoration of the birth centenary celebration of doyen of Assamese literature Lakshminath Bezbaroa. After almost half a century, this historic book has been recovered and re-edited by Assamese award-winning short-story writer & novelist Arnab Jan Deka, which was published by Assam Foundation-India in 2014.[31]

Bengali literature[edit]
Main article: Bengali literature
See also: Bengali novels, Bengali poetry, and Bengali science fiction
Rabindranath Tagore, the author of many works, including Gitanjali and India's national anthem 'Jana Gana Mana'. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1913 for "his profoundly sensitive, fresh and beautiful verse, by which, with consummate skill, he has made his poetic thought, expressed in his own English words, a part of the literature of the West." He was the first person of non-European lineage to win a Nobel Prize.
Bankim Chandra Chatterjee, the author of India's National Song 'Vande Mataram'.
The first evidence of Bengali literature is known as Charyapada or Charyageeti, which were Buddhist hymns from the 8th century. Charyapada is in the oldest known written form of Bengali. The famous Bengali linguist Hara Prasad Shastri discovered the palm leaf Charyapada manuscript in the Nepal Royal Court Library in 1907.
The most internationally famous Bengali writer is Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore, who received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1913 for his work "Gitanjali". He wrote the national anthem of India and Bangladesh namely, "Jana Gana Mana" and "Amar Sonar Bangla", respectively. He was the first Asian who won the Nobel Prize.
Rabindranath has written an enormous number of poems, songs, essays, novels, plays and short stories. His songs remain popular and are still widely sung in Bengal.[citation needed][verification needed]

Hindi literature[edit]
Main article: Hindi literature
Hindi literature started as religious and philosophical poetry in medieval periods in dialects like Avadhi and Brij. The most famous figures from this period are Kabir and Tulsidas. In modern times, the Dehlavi dialect of the Hindi Belt became more prominent than Sanskrit.[citation needed][verification needed]

Gujarati literature[edit]
Main article: Gujarati literature
Suresh Joshi is known as father of modern Gujarati literature.
Gujarati literature's history may be traced to 1000 AD.[citation needed][verification needed]

Kannada literature[edit]
Kannada writer and Jnanpith Award winner for the year 1994, U. R. Ananthamurthy
Main article: Kannada literature
See also: Medieval Kannada literature and Kannada poetry
The oldest existing record of Kannada prose is the Halmidi inscription of 450 CE, and poetry in tripadi metre is the Kappe Arabhatta record of 700 CE. The folk form of literature began earlier than any other literature in Kannada. Gajashtaka (800 CE) by King Shivamara II, Chudamani (650 CE) by Thumbalacharya are examples of early literature now considered extinct. Kavirajamarga by King Nripatunga Amoghavarsha I (850 CE) is the earliest existing literary work in Kannada. It is a writing on literary criticism and poetics meant to standardise various written Kannada dialects used in literature in previous centuries. The book makes reference to Kannada works by early writers such as King Durvinita of the 6th century and Ravikirti, the author of the Aihole record of 636 CE. An early extant prose work, the Vaddaradhane by Shivakotiacharya of 900 CE provides an elaborate description of the life of Bhadrabahu of Shravanabelagola. Since the earliest available Kannada work is one on grammar and a guide of sorts to unify existing variants of Kannada grammar and literary styles, it can be safely assumed that literature in Kannada must have started several centuries earlier.[32]
Pampa who popularised Champu style which is unique to Kannada wrote the epic "Vikramarjuna Vijaya". He also wrote "Adipurana". Other famous poets like Ponna wrote "shantinatapurana", "Bhuvanaikaramabhyudaya", "Jinaksharamale", and "gatapratyagata". Ranna wrote "Shantipurana" and "Ghadayudha". The Jain poet Nagavarma II wrote "Kavyavalokana", "Karnatabhashabhushana" and "Vardhamanapurana" . Janna was the author of "Yashodhara Charitha". Rudhrabhatta and Durgashima wrote "Jagannatha Vijaya" and "Panchatantra" respectively. The works of the medieval period are based on Jain and Hindu principles. The Vachana Sahitya tradition of the 12th century is purely native and unique in world literature.[33]

Kashmiri literature[edit]
Main article: Kashmiri literature
Konkani literature[edit]
Konkani is a language with a complex and much-contested history. It is one of the few Indian languages to be written in five scripts—Roman, Nagari, Kannada, Persian-Arabic and Malayalam-and also has an extensive oral literature.[citation needed][verification needed]

Malayalam literature[edit]
Main article: Malayalam literature
Even up to 500 years since the start of the Malayalam calendar which commenced in 825 AD, Malayalam literature remained in preliminary stage. During this time, Malayalam literature consisted mainly of various genres of songs.[citation needed][verification needed]

Maithili literature[edit]
Main article: Maithili literature
Maithili literature is the entire collection of poetry, novels, short stories, documents and other writings in the Maithili language.
The Maithili script, Mithilakshara or Tirhuta as it is popularly known, is of a great antiquity. The Lalitavistara mentions the Vaidehi script. Early in the latter half of the 7th century A.D., a marked change occurred in the northeastern alphabet, and the inscriptions of Adityasena exhibit this change for the first time. The eastern variety develops and becomes the Maithili script, which comes into use in Assam, Bengal, and Nepal. The earliest recorded epigraphic evidence of the script is found in the Mandar Hill Stone inscriptions of Adityasena in the 7th century A.D., now fixed in the Baidyanath temple of Deoghar.[34]
The language of the Buddhist dohas is described as belonging to the mixed Maithili—Kamrupi language.[35]

Modern Meitei literature [edit]
Not to be confused with § Ancient Meitei literature.
Main article: Modern Meitei literature
Further information: Meitei language in Bangladesh
Modern Meitei literature, the descendant of Ancient Meitei literature, is written in modern Meitei language (also known as Manipuri language), composed by writers from Manipur, Assam, Tripura, Myanmar and Bangladesh. The history of Meitei literature can be traced back to thousands of years with the flourish of Meitei civilization. Khamba Thoibi Sheireng (Meitei for 'Epic of Khamba Thoibi'), the third longest Indian epic poem, next to the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, is a Meitei epic poem, based on the classic tale of Khamba and Thoibi,[36] having 39,000 lines, is regarded as the national epic of the Manipuris.[37]

Marathi literature[edit]
Main article: Marathi literature
Marathi literature began with saint-poets like Dnyaneshwar, Tukaram, Ramdas, and Eknath. Modern Marathi literature was marked by a theme of social reform.[citation needed][verification needed]

Nepali literature[edit]
Main article: Nepali literature
Odia literature[edit]
Main article: Odia literature
Odia language literary history started with the charyapadas written in the 8th century AD. Odia has a rich literary heritage, the medieval period dating back to the 13th century. Sarala Das who lived in the 14th century is known as the Vyasa of Odisha. He translated the Mahabharata into Odia.[citation needed][verification needed]

Punjabi literature[edit]
Main article: Punjabi literature
The history of Punjabi literature starts with advent of Aryans in Punjab.
Punjab provided them the perfect environment in which to compose the ancient texts. The Rig-Veda is first example in which references are made to the rivers, flora and fauna of Punjab. The Punjabi literary tradition is generally conceived to commence with Fariduddin Ganjshakar (1173–1266).[citation needed][verification needed]

Sindhi literature[edit]
Main article: Sindhi literature
Tamil literature[edit]
Main article: Tamil literature
Tamil literature has a rich and long literary tradition spanning more than 2500 years (Sangam period: 5th century BC-3rd century CE.) Tolkaappiyam (3rd century BC) has been credited as the oldest work in Tamil available today.[citation needed][verification needed]

Telugu literature[edit]
Main article: Telugu literature
Telugu, the Indian language with the third largest number of speakers (after Hindi & Bengali), is rich in literary traditions.
Literature has existed from 300 BC in the form of inscriptions. The earliest written literature dates back to the 7th century.[citation needed][verification needed]

Urdu literature[edit]
Main article: Urdu literature
Among other traditions, Urdu poetry is a fine example of linguistic and cultural synthesis. Arab and Persian vocabulary based on the Hindi language resulted in a vast and extremely beloved class of ghazal literature, usually written by Muslims in contexts ranging from romance and society to philosophy and Tassawuf (Sufism).[citation needed][verification needed]

Sahitya Akademi recognised but non scheduled languages[edit]
Further information: Sahitya Akademi § Recognised literary languages, and Scheduled languages of India
Indian English literature [edit]
Main article: Indian English literature
Further information: Indian English
In the 20th century, several Indian writers have distinguished themselves not only in traditional Indian languages but also in English, a language inherited from the British. As a result of British colonisation, India has developed its own unique dialect of English known as Indian English.[citation needed][verification needed]

Rajasthani literature[edit]
Main article: Rajasthani literature
Non Sahitya Akademi recognised & non scheduled languages [edit]
Further information: Sahitya Akademi § Recognised literary languages, and Scheduled languages of India
Bhojpuri literature[edit]
Main article: Bhojpuri literature
Chhattisgarhi literature[edit]
Literature in Chhattisgarh reflects the regional consciousness and the evolution of an identity distinct from others in Central India.[citation needed][verification needed]

Kodava literature[edit]
When Kodava was written, it was usually with Kannada script, sometimes with minor modifications.[citation needed][verification needed]

Mizo literature[edit]
Main article: Mizo literature
Mizo literature is the literature written in Mizo ṭtawng, the principal language of the Mizo peoples, which has both written and oral traditions. It has undergone a considerable change in the 20th century. The language developed mainly from the Lushai language, with significant influence from Pawi language, Paite language and Hmar language, especially at the literary level.[38]

Nagpuri literature[edit]
Main article: Nagpuri literature

Nagpuri literature refers to literature in the Nagpuri language, the language of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Odisha. The earliest literature started in the nagpuri language when the Nagvanshi king and king of Ramgarh Raj started writing poetry in the 17th century. Since then, various literature has been written.[39] Although in the present century, Nagpuri was never considered worthy of literary development, a small but dedicated writers have engaged in writing short stories, plays and poetry.[40]

Tripuri literature[edit]
Main article: Tripuri literature
Tripuri(Kokborok/Tiprakok) is the native language of Tripuri people in present Tripura state in North East of India.[citation needed][verification needed]

Tulu literature[edit]
Main article: Tulu literature
The written literature of Tulu is not as large as the literature of other literary Dravidian languages such as Tamil.[citation needed][verification needed]

In foreign languages[edit]
Indian Persian literature[edit]
Main article: Persian language in the Indian subcontinent
During the early Muslim period, Persian became the official language of the northern part of Indian subcontinent, used by most of the educated and the government. The language had, from its earliest days in the 11th century AD, been imported to the subcontinent by various culturally Persianised Central Asian Turkic and Afghan dynasties.[41]

Literature from North East India[edit]
Main article: Literature from North East India
Further information: § Ancient Meitei literature, § Assamese literature, and § Modern Meitei literature
Literature from North East India included Assamese literature, Meitei or Manipuri literature, Naga literature, among others. Ancient India has many intensive examples, like that of the incredible verses translated from the Ramayana, named Saptakanda Ramayana. Choral songs known as Oja-Pali,[42] and theater performances, known as Panchali, were also an extensive part of Assamese literature.[43]

Awards[edit]
In contemporary Indian literature, there are two major literary awards; these are the Sahitya Akademi Fellowship and the Jnanpith Award. Eight Jnanpith Awards each have been awarded in Hindi and Kannada, followed by five in Bengali and Malayalam, four in Odia, Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu and Urdu,[44][45] two each in Assamese, Konkani and Tamil, and one each in Sanskrit and Kashmiri۔[citation needed][verification needed]

Sahitya Akademi Fellowship
Jnanpith Award
Sahitya Akademi Award
Vyas Samman
Saraswati Samman
See also[edit]

India portalLiterature portal
Indian epic poetry
Indian Literature (journal)
Indian poetry
List of ancient Indian writers
Literature from North East India
Stephanian School of Literature
Footnotes[edit]


^ Narayanrao, H.L. "A Brief on Indian Literature and Languages". Journal of Education and Practice. 2 (3): 46. ISSN 2222-288X.

^ —Ayyappappanikkar (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. p. 326. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.—Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Ougri". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. pp. 81, 82, 83.—Singh, Ch Manihar (1996). "The Early Period (Ritual Songs) : Ougri". A History of Manipuri Literature (in English and Manipuri). India: Sahitya Akademi. pp. 13, 14. ISBN 978-81-260-0086-9. Again from amongst the songs mentioned above, 'Ougri' and 'Khencho', in view of their more archaic diction and much advanced historical allusions, may be considered earlier than the rest. ... 'Ougri' is referred to as sung at the coronation of Nongdā Lāiren Pākhangbā, which took place in 33 A.D. ...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)—Ayyappappanikkar (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. p. 329. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.

^ —Wouters, Jelle J. P.; Subba, Tanka B. (30 September 2022). The Routledge Companion to Northeast India. Taylor & Francis. p. 473. ISBN 978-1-000-63699-4. ... Numit Kappa, a Meitei text from the 1st century CE, is particularly relevant and insightful in examining this peculiar relationship between power and violence. The text is recited as incantations during chupsaba, a cleansing ritual for 'violent' death...—"Shooting the Sun: A Study of Death and Protest in Manipur". Economic and Political Weekly. Austin, USA. 44 (40). 3 October 2009 – via University of Texas. ... Numit Kappa gives one such version. Considered one of the earliest known literary compositions in Meitei script, it is dated to the ﬁrst century AD...—Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Numit Kappa". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. pp. 95, 96.—Kshetrimayum, Jogendro (2009). "Shooting the Sun: A Study of Death and Protest in Manipur". Economic and Political Weekly. 44 (40): 48–54. ISSN 0012-9976.

^ "Kannada literature", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008. Quote: "The earliest literary work is the Kavirajamarga (c. AD 900), a treatise on poetics based on a Sanskrit model."

^ —Indian Literature - Volume 14 - Page 20 (Volume 14 - Page 20 ed.). Sahitya Akademi. 1971. p. 20. The beginning of this old Manipuri literature (as in the case of Newari) may go back to 1500 years, or even 2000 years, from now.—Siṃha, Niṃthaukhoṃjama Khelacandra (1975). Manipuri Language: Status and Importance (in English and Manipuri). N. Tombi Raj Singh. p. 34. The beginning of this old Manipuri literature (as in the case of Newari) may go back to 1500 years, or even 2000 years, from now...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)—Sanajaoba, Naorem (1988). Manipur, Past and Present: The Heritage and Ordeals of a Civilization. Mittal Publications. p. 290. ISBN 978-81-7099-853-2.

^ —Ayyappappanikkar (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. p. 326. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.—Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Ougri". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. pp. 81, 82, 83.—Singh, Ch Manihar (1996). "The Early Period (Ritual Songs) : Ougri". A History of Manipuri Literature (in English and Manipuri). India: Sahitya Akademi. pp. 13, 14. ISBN 978-81-260-0086-9. Again from amongst the songs mentioned above, 'Ougri' and 'Khencho', in view of their more archaic diction and much advanced historical allusions, may be considered earlier than the rest. ... 'Ougri' is referred to as sung at the coronation of Nongdā Lāiren Pākhangbā, which took place in 33 A.D. ...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)—Ayyappappanikkar (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. p. 329. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.

^ —Wouters, Jelle J. P.; Subba, Tanka B. (30 September 2022). The Routledge Companion to Northeast India. Taylor & Francis. p. 473. ISBN 978-1-000-63699-4. ... Numit Kappa, a Meitei text from the 1st century CE, is particularly relevant and insightful in examining this peculiar relationship between power and violence. The text is recited as incantations during chupsaba, a cleansing ritual for 'violent' death...—"Shooting the Sun: A Study of Death and Protest in Manipur". Economic and Political Weekly. Austin, USA. 44 (40). 3 October 2009 – via University of Texas. ... Numit Kappa gives one such version. Considered one of the earliest known literary compositions in Meitei script, it is dated to the ﬁrst century AD...—Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Numit Kappa". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. pp. 95, 96.—Kshetrimayum, Jogendro (2009). "Shooting the Sun: A Study of Death and Protest in Manipur". Economic and Political Weekly. 44 (40): 48–54. ISSN 0012-9976.

^ —Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Poireiton Khunthokpa". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in English and Manipuri). Manipur University Library, Imphal. India: Digital Library of India. pp. 121, 122. The Poireiton Khunthokpa, is the most conspicuous one of all pre-Garibniwaz manuscripts. From a linguistic point of view, it seems to be much earlier than any of the books yet come under our view. Circumstantial and other incidental evidences would confirm that the book might have been of the time of the third century A. D. It describes the colonization of the valley by a band of people from the land of Death under Poireiton. They first established their colony near the Langol Hill; probably the vast area between the Koubru Hill and the Langol Hill was their kingdom.  --Report on the Archaeological studies in Manipur Bulletin No. 1-by W. Yumjao Singh, pp 18-19.—Bhaṭṭācāryya, Haridāsa (1953). The Cultural Heritage of India: Languages and literatures. University of Michigan. India: Ramakrishna Mission, Institute of Culture. p. 663. ... The beginnings of this Old Manipuri literature may go back to 1,500 years or even 2,000 years from now. ... Poireiton Khunthok, a prose work describing the settlement of some Meithei tribes, is the oldest work in Manipuri going back to the third century A.D. ...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)

^ —Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Khencho". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. pp. 97, 98.—Ayyappappanikkar (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections. Sahitya Akademi. p. 330. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.—Singh, Ch Manihar (1996). "The Early Period (Ritual Songs)". A History of Manipuri Literature (in English and Manipuri). India: Sahitya Akademi. pp. 14, 15. ISBN 978-81-260-0086-9. ... 'Khencho' is quite obscure and entirely unintelligible to the present generation though it forms an inseparable element of the daily proceedings of the festival. ...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)

^ —"মণিপুরি ভাষা ও লিপি – এল বীরমঙ্গল সিংহ | আপনপাঠ ওয়েবজিন" (in Bengali). 16 September 2021.—Devi, Yumlembam Gopi. Glimpses of Manipuri Culture. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-359-72919-7.—Paniker, K. Ayyappa (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: Surveys and selections (Assamese-Dogri). Sahitya Akademi. p. 325. ISBN 978-81-260-0365-5.—Sen, Sipra (1992). Tribes and Castes of Manipur: Description and Select Bibliography. Mittal Publications. p. 28. ISBN 978-81-7099-310-0.

^ —Devi, Dr Yumlembam Gopi. Glimpses of Manipuri Culture. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-359-72919-7. ... the text Panthoibi Khongul generally believed to have been written by Akoijam Tomboy during the reign of King Khongtekcha Yoiremba (763 A.D.) ...—Mukherjee, Sujit (1998). A Dictionary of Indian Literature: Beginnings-1850. Orient Blackswan. p. 280. ISBN 978-81-250-1453-9. Panthoibi khongul ( ? C ; Manipuri ) : prose narrative , the original of which was believed to have been composed in ancient Meitei language in first half of 8th century AD ...{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)—"The relationship between Thang-Ta & Meitei Pung maintained by our Ancient ..." (PDF). ccrtindia.gov.in. Ministry of Culture, Government of India. Centre for Cultural Resources and Training. p. 4.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)

^ —Sanajaoba, Naorem (1993). Manipur: Treatise & Documents. Mittal Publications. p. 2. ISBN 978-81-7099-399-5. Manipur, known as 'Meetei Leipak' or 'Kangleipak' in the two millennia old Meetei manuscripts had experienced some form of constitutional government under a proto-Constitution in 429 A.D. which was reduced to a final format in 1110 A.D. Constitution entitled 'Loiyamba Shinyen' during the regime of King Loyumba.—Singh, Khelchandra Ningthoukhongjam. "Loiyumba Shinyen - Waayen Pathaap". History Of Old Manipuri Literature (in Manipuri). Manipur University Library; North Eastern States Libraries. India: Digital Library of India; Internet Archive. p. 142.—Sanajaoba, Naorem (1991). Law and Society: Strategy for Public Choice, 2001. Mittal Publications. p. 304. ISBN 978-81-7099-271-4. The constitutionalism had developed with the adoption of a prototype of a constitution in 429 A.D. which was finally moulded into the written constitution in 1110 A.D., called 'Loyumba Shinyen' till it was substituted by Manipur State Constitution Act, 1947 which operated till Manipur's merger with India on October 15, 1949.

^ Fallon, Oliver. 2009. Bhatti's Poem: The Death of Rávana (Bhaṭṭikāvya). New York: Clay Sanskrit Library[1] Archived 7 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine. ISBN 978-0-8147-2778-2  |  ISBN 0-8147-2778-6  |

^ Narang, Satya Pal. 2003. An Analysis of the Prākṛta of Bhāśā-sama of the Bhaṭṭi-kāvya (Canto XII). In: Prof. Mahapatra G.N., Vanijyotih: Felicitation Volume, Utkal University, *Bhuvaneshwar.

^ There are some who claim earlier dates (up to 600 BCE). Others cite as late as 2BCE. The date of 300 BCE may represent a middle-of-the road consensus view; e.g. see the well-received textbook Ancient India, Upinder Singh, 2009, p. 15.  However, it is quite likely that the songs existed in oral tradition well before this date.

^ Kamil Veith Zvelebil, Companion Studies to the History of Tamil Literature, p. 12

^ K.A. Nilakanta Sastry, A History of South India, OUP (1955) p. 105

^ Classical Tamil Archived 7 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ T.S. Subramanian (10 July 2009). "Jain History of Tamil Nadu vandalised". Retrieved 3 June 2011. The six Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions of the 2nd century B.C. on the brow of five caverns on the Kazhugumalai hill near Mankulam, 38 km from Madurai, are the most ancient ones in Tamil Nadu and establish the historical facts that the Pandyan king Nedunchezhiyan ruled in the 2nd century B.C. and that Sangam literature dates back to the same period.

^ George L. Hart III, The Poems of Ancient Tamil, U of California P, 1975.

^ Iḷaṅkōvaṭikaḷ (1 January 1965). Shilappadikaram: (The Ankle Bracelet). New Directions Publishing. ISBN 9780811200011.

^ Irayanaar Agapporul dated to c 750 AD first mentioned the Sangam legends. An inscription of the early tenth century AD mentions the achievements of the early Pandya kings of establishing a Sangam in Madurai. See K.A. Nilakanta Sastry, A History of South India, OUP (1955) p. 105

^ "The latest limit of Ettutokai and Pattupattu may be placed around 700 AD...." – Vaiyapuri Pillai, History of Tamil language and literature p. 38.

^ "...the Tamil language of these brief records achieved a flowering during the first centuries of the Common Era, culminating in the emergence of a poetic corpus of very high quality [...] To this corpus the name sangam poetry was added soon afterwards...." Burton Stein, A History of India (1998), Blackwell p. 90.

^ See K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, A History of South India, OUP (1955) pp. 330–335

^ Chera, Chola, Pandya: Using Archaeological Evidence to Identify the Tamil Kingdoms of Early Historic South India – Abraham, Shinu Anna, Asian Perspectives – Volume 42, Number 2, Fall 2003, pp. 207–223 University of Hawaii Press

^ Morality and Ethics in Public Life by Ravindra Kumar p.92

^ Essays on Indian Society by Raj Kumar p.71

^ "The writers of the Charyapada, the Mahasiddhas or Siddhacharyas, belonged to the various regions of Assam, Bengal, Orissa and Bihar". sites.google.com. Retrieved 14 July 2020.

^ Shaw, Miranda; Shaw, Miranda (1995). Passionate Enlightenment::Women in Tantric Buddhism. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01090-8.

^ Sentinel, The (4 December 2014). "Documentary film, books on Bhabananda–Nalini Prava". Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 24 December 2014.

^ Jyotsna Kamat. "History of the Kannada Literature-I". Kamat's Potpourri, 4 November 2006. Kamat's Potpourri. Retrieved 25 November 2006.

^ "Declare Kannada a classical language". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 27 May 2005. Archived from the original on 5 January 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007.

^ Choudhary, R. (1976). A survey of Maithili literature. Ram Vilas Sahu.

^ Barua, K. L. (1933). Early history of Kamarupa. Shillong: Published by the Author.

^ —KanglaOnline (4 April 2011). "The great Meitei Reconciliation Process: Revisiting the classical folklore on "Emoinu Chakhong Ngahongbi" by Late Shri Ningomabam Angouton Meetei – KanglaOnline". Retrieved 12 November 2023. ... The folklore of Emoinu Celebration from the story "Washak Ngakpa" meaning Keeping the Promise, written by Late Shri Ningombam Angouton Meetei and the classical love story "Khamba -Thoibi" are classical examples of successful reconciliation process of the old Meitei factions...—Delhi, All India Radio (AIR), New (17 March 1968). "Some Classics of Manipur". AKASHVANI: Vol. XXXIII, No.12 ( 17 MARCH, 1968 ). India: All India Radio (AIR), New Delhi. pp. 7, 8.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)—Bond, Ruskin (14 October 2000). "The Story of Khamba and Thoibi". The Penguin Book of Classical Indian Love Stories and Lyrics. Penguin UK. pp. 3, 4. ISBN 978-93-5118-814-8.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)

^ —George, K. M. (1992). Modern Indian Literature, an Anthology: Surveys and poems. India: Sahitya Akademi. p. 258. ISBN 978-81-7201-324-0. H. Anganghal Singh's Khamba Thoibi Sheireng (Poem on Khamba Thoibi, 1940) is a national epic of the Manipuris based on the story of Khamba and Thoibi of Moirang. The poet composes the whole epic in the Pena Saisak style of folk ballads sung by minstrels or bards popular in Manipur.—Datta, Amaresh (1988). Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature: Devraj to Jyoti. India: Sahitya Akademi. p. 1186. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)—Das, Sisir Kumar (2005). A History of Indian Literature: 1911-1956, struggle for freedom : triumph and tragedy. Sahitya Akademi. p. 190. ISBN 978-81-7201-798-9. His epic Singel Indu was published in 1938 which was followed by his magnum opus Khamba Thoibi Sheireng (1940), a poem of 39000 lines, considered to be the 'national' epic of the Manipuris, written in the Pena Saisak style of folk ballads.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: date and year (link)

^ "Vanglaini". vanglaini.org. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ "Giant new chapter for Nagpuri poetry". telegraphindia. 5 November 2012. Retrieved 6 October 2022.

^ "JOURNAL OF CRITICAL REVIEWS A Study of the Special Features of Nagpuri Language of Jharkhand". research gate. July 2020. Retrieved 6 October 2022.

^ Sigfried J. de Laet. History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century UNESCO, 1994. ISBN 9231028138 p 734

^ "Ojapali – A performing art form of Assam". www.oknortheast.com. Retrieved 22 January 2021.

^ Barua, Hem (1957). "Assamese literature". Indian Literature. 1 (1): 65–68. ISSN 0019-5804. JSTOR 23328613.

^ "Jnanpith | Home". jnanpith.net. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ "Kunwar Narayan to be awarded Jnanpith". The Times of India. 24 November 2008. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 25 November 2008.


External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Literature of India.




Wikiquote has quotations related to Indian literature.




Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Hindōstānī Literature".

Indian Literature on Indohistory
Indian Literature, Fiction and Poetry Magazine
South Asian Canonical Texts[permanent dead link]
Bhas - Longest Poem on Indian Constitution set World Record
vteIndia topicsHistoryOverviews
Timeline
Years
Astronomy
Clothing
Coinage
Economics
LGBT
Linguistics
Maritime
Mathematics
Metallurgy
Military
Paper currency
Postal
Science and technology
Ancient 
Stone Age
Indus Valley civilization
Vedic period
Mahajanapadas
Mauryas
Yavana Kingdom
Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley
Indo-Parthian Kingdom
Kushan Empire
Alchon Huns
Seleucid–Mauryan war
Middle Kingdoms
Middle kingdoms
Chola
Middle Ages
Medieval India
Hoysala
Pala
Kakatiya
Delhi Sultanate
Vijayanagara
Early Modern
Mughals
Marathas
European trade
Bengal War
Late modern
Colonial
Princely state
East India Company
Plassey
1857 rebellion
British Raj
Railways
Economy
Army
Commander-in-Chief
Zamindari
Bengal Renaissance
Political reforms
Partition of Bengal
Independence movement
1943 famine
World War II
Partition
Republic
Integration
Non-Aligned Movement
Five-Year Plans
Sino-Indian War
Indo-Pakistani wars
Green Revolution
White Revolution
Naxal Insurgency
Smiling Buddha
Space programme
The Emergency
Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF)
Contemporary
History of India (1947–present)
Economic liberalisation
Pokhran-II
COVID-19 pandemic
GeographyEnvironment
Biosphere reserves
Climate
Climate change
Earthquakes
Ecoregions
Environmental issues
Fauna
Flora
Geology
National parks
Protected areas
Wildlife
sanctuaries
Landforms
Beaches
Desert
Extreme points
Glaciers
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Plains
Indo-Gangetic
Eastern coastal
Western coastal
Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls
Regions
East
North
Northeast
South
West
Subdivisions
Autonomous administrative divisions
Borders
Towns
Cities
Districts
Municipalities
States and union territories
PoliticsGovernment
Agencies
Energy policy
Foreign relations
Parliament
Lok Sabha
Rajya Sabha
President
Vice President
Prime Minister
Union Council of Ministers
Civil Services
Cabinet Secretary
State governments
State legislative assemblies
State legislative councils
Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators
Chief Ministers
Chief Secretaries
Law
Constitution
Penal Code
Fundamental rights, principles and duties
Human rights
LGBT
Supreme Court
Chief Justice
High Courts
District Courts
EnforcementFederal
Border Security Force (BSF)
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
National Security Guard (NSG)
Railway Protection Force (RPF)
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
Special Protection Group (SPG)
Intelligence
Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D)
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
Enforcement Directorate (ED)
Intelligence Bureau (IB)
Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
National Investigation Agency (NIA)
Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)
Military
Army
Navy
Air Force
Politics
Censorship
Citizenship
Elections
Nationalism
Political parties
Reservations
Scandals
Scheduled groups
Secularism
Women in politics
EconomyCompanies
BSE SENSEX
NIFTY 50
Governance
Ministry of Finance
Finance ministers
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Finance Commission
Economic Advisory Council
Central Statistical Office
Securities and Exchange Board of India
Enforcement Directorate
External debt
Foreign trade
Foreign direct investment
Foreign exchange reserves
Remittances
Taxation
Subsidies
Industrial licensing
Voluntary guidelines
NITI Aayog
Make in India
Atmanirbhar Bharat
Currency
Indian rupee
Sign
History
Historical Forex
Digital rupee
Coinage
Paisa
Reserve Bank of India
Governor
Mint
Inflation
Financial services
Banking
Insurance
Multi Commodity Exchange
Bullion
Black money
Bombay
National
History
COVID-19 impact
Economic development
Liberalisation
Licence Raj
Green revolution
Government initiatives
Numbering system
People
By net worth
Demography
Income
Poverty
Labour law
Pensions
EPFO
NPS
PPF
States
Andhra Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Ladakh
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Mizoram
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttarakhand
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Sectors
Agriculture
Livestock
Fishing
Automotive
Chemical
Construction
Defence
Education
Energy
Electricity
Nuclear
Oil and gas
Solar
Wind
Electronics and semiconductor
Entertainment
Forestry
Gambling
Healthcare
Information technology
Media
Cinema
FM Radio
Television
Printing
Mining
Coal
Iron and Steel
Pharmaceuticals
Pulp and paper
Retail
Science and technology
Biotechnology
Space
Telecommunications
Textiles
Tourism
Transport
Aviation
Civil
Ports
Rail
Roads
Electricity
Water
Power
Regulator
IRDAI
RBI
SEBI
IBBI
Other
NCLT
NCLAT
BIFR
IBBI
IBC
SARFESI Act
Income Tax Act
Companies Act
Banking Act
Insurance Act
FEMA
Mumbai Consensus
Society and cultureSociety
Caste system
Corruption
Demographics
Indians
Women
Education
Universities in India
Medical colleges in India
Law colleges in India
Engineering colleges in India
Ethnic relations
Healthcare
Hospitals in India
Languages
Literacy
Poverty
Prisons
Religion
Socio-economic issues
Standard of living
Water supply and sanitation
Sexuality
Crime
Youth
Culture
Arts and entertainment
Architecture
Blogging
Cinema
Comics
Webcomics
Cuisine
wine
Dance
Dress
Folklore
Festivals
Literature
Media
television
Martial arts
Music
Painting
Public holidays
Sculpture
tallest
Sport
Traditional

vteAsian literatureSovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Burma (Myanmar)
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States with limitedrecognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

Authority control databases: National 
France
BnF data
Israel
United States
Japan
Czech Republic





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_literature&oldid=1185302061"
Category: Indian literatureHidden categories: CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2)CS1 maint: date and yearCS1 Bengali-language sources (bn)CS1 maint: othersWebarchive template wayback linksCS1 maint: multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataArticles lacking in-text citations from December 2015All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing cleanup from December 2015All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2015Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2015Articles with multiple maintenance issuesUse Indian English from December 2015All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from December 2020All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2023All pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2023Articles needing additional references from April 2013All articles needing additional referencesArticles containing Meitei-language textUse dmy dates from September 2022Commons category link is on WikidataAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2017Articles with permanently dead external linksRegion topic template using suffixArticles with BNF identifiersArticles with BNFdata identifiersArticles with J9U identifiersArticles with LCCN identifiersArticles with NDL identifiersArticles with NKC identifiers
