



From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Wildlife of India


Wildlife of India
Biodiversity
Flora
Fauna
Lists
Amphibians
Ants
Birds
Butterflies
Fish
Mammals
Molluscs
Moths
Odonates
Tiger beetles
Reptiles
Spiders
Endangered animals

Protected areas
Biosphere reserves
Wildlife sanctuaries
Conservation areas
Private protected areas
Reserved andprotected forests
Conservation andcommunity reserves
Communal forests
Lists
National parks
Ramsar Sites

Conservation
Projects
Tiger
Elephant
Acts of Parliament
Indian Forest Act 1927
Wildlife Protection Act 1972
Wildlife Protection Act 2002

Organisations
National
Ministry of Environmentand Forests
National Biodiversity Authority
Indian Forest Service / Survey
Forest Institute
Wildlife Institute
Tiger Conservation Authority
Zoo Authority
International
Convention on International Tradein Endangered Species (CITES)
International Union forConservation of Nature (IUCN)
South Asian ZooAssociation (SAZARC)
World Association of Zoosand Aquariums (WAZA)
World Society for theProtection of Animals (WSPA)
World Wide Fundfor Nature (WWF)

Related topics
Indian natural history
Environmental issues
Fossil parks
Forestry
Tourism
Lists
Ecoregions
Botanical gardens
Zoological gardens
vte
India is home to a large variety of wildlife. It is a biodiversity hotspot with various ecosystems ranging from the Himalayas in the north to the evergreen rain forests in the south, the sands of the west to the marshy mangroves of the east. India lies within the Indomalayan realm and is the home to about 7.6% of mammal, 14.7% of amphibian, 6% of bird, 6.2% of reptilian, and 6.2% of flowering plant species.[1] India's forests contain about 500 species of mammals and more than 1300 bird species.[citation needed]
India is one of the most biodiverse regions of the world and include three of the world's 36 biodiversity hotspots – the Western Ghats, the Eastern Himalayas, and the Indo-Burma hotspot.[2][3] It is one of the 17 megadiverse countries. The country has 12 biosphere reserves and 75 Ramsar sites.
In response to decrease in the numbers of wild animals, human encroachment and poaching activities, the Government of India established a system of national parks and protected areas in 1935, which subsequently expanded. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial habitat. Further federal protections were promulgated in the 1980s.
India has about 2,714 endemic lichen species. In 2020, the Lichen Park in India was developed by the Uttarakhand Forest Department in Munsiyari.[4]


Geographic origins[edit]
Many Indian species are descendants of species originating in Gondwana, of which India originally was a part. Peninsular India's subsequent movement towards, and collision with, the Laurasian landmass set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism in the Deccan Traps and climatic change 20 million years ago caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms.[5] Soon thereafter, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographical passes on either side of the emerging Himalayas.[6] As a result, among Indian species, only 12.6% of mammals and 4.5% of birds are endemic, contrasting with 45.8% of reptiles and 55.8% of amphibians[1] Notable endemics are the Nilgiri langur and the brown and carmine Beddome's toad of the Western Ghats. India harbours 172, or 2.9%, of IUCN-designated threatened species.[7]
India is located at the junction of three biogeographic realms: the Afrotropical, Indomalayan and Palearctic, and therefore, has characteristic elements from each of them, spurring migration of avifauna from these regions.

Fauna[edit]
Main article: Fauna of India
A Bengal tigress in Pench Tiger Reserve
Family of Asiatic lions at Gir National Park
Indian leopard in Nagarhole National Park
Grey langur family
Nicobar pigeon, Nicobar Islands
Chital herd in Kanha National Park
A barasingha at Dudhwa National Park
Blackbucks in Blackbuck National Park, Velavadar
Male Indian elephant in Bandipur National Park
Indian rhinoceros at Kaziranga National Park
A gharial in Chambal River
India is home to several well-known large animals, including the Indian elephant,[8] Indian rhinoceros,[9] Bengal tiger,[10] Asiatic lion,[11] Indian leopard,[12] snow leopard,[13] and clouded leopard.[14] Bears include sloth bear, sun bear, the Himalayan black bear, the Himalayan brown bear, and deer and antelopes include the chausinga antelope, the blackbuck, chinkara gazelle, chital, sambar, sangai, nilgai, Tibetan antelope, goa, Kashmir stag, musk deer, Indian muntjac, Indian hog deer, and the barasinga. It is home to big cats like Bengal tiger, Asiatic lion, Indian leopard, snow leopard, caracal, Eurasian lynx and clouded leopard. Various species of caprines, including Bhutan and Mishmi takin, Himalayan and red goral, Himalayan serow, red serow, Himalayan tahr, Siberian ibex, markhor, and Nilgiri tahr, as well as the kiang and Indian wild ass. Wild sheep include blue sheep and argali. Gaur, wild water buffalo, wild yak, zebu, and gayal are also found. Small mammals include Indian crested porcupine, Indian boar, pygmy hog, Nilgiri marten, palm civet,[specify] red panda, binturong, and hog badger. Canidae include Tibetan and Bengal fox, Himalayan and Indian wolf, Ussuri dhole and Indian jackal. It is also home to the striped hyena. Aquatic mammals include Ganges river dolphin and finless porpoise. Reptiles include king cobra, Indian cobra, bamboo pit viper, Sri Lankan green vine snake, common krait, Indian rock python, Burmese python, reticulated python, mugger crocodile, gharial, saltwater crocodile and Indian golden gecko. Notable amphibians include the purple frog, Indian tree frog and Himalayan newt. Birds include Indian peacock, great Indian hornbill, great Indian bustard, ruddy shelduck, Himalayan monal, Himalayan quail, painted stork, greater and lesser flamingo, and Eurasian spoonbill.[15][16]

Flora[edit]
Main article: Flora of India
Lotus, the national  flower of India
There are about 18,500 species of flowering plants in India. The Indian Forest Act, 1927 helped to improve the protection and security of the natural habitat. Many ecoregions, such as the shola forests, also exhibit extremely high rates of endemism; overall, 33% of Indian plant species are endemic.[17] Forest ranges from the tropical rainforest of the Andaman Islands, Western Ghats, and Northeast India to the coniferous forest of the Himalayas. Between these extremes lie the sal-dominated moist deciduous forest of eastern India; teak-dominated dry deciduous forest of central and southern India, and the babul-dominated thorn forest of the central Deccan and western Gangetic plain.[6] Mangrove forests such as the Sundarbans are on the coasts of West Bengal and Odisha. Important Indian trees include the medicinal neem, widely used in rural Indian herbal remedies. Bamboo gardens are extremely common in jungles as well as villages. States like Sikkim and West Bengal have orchids. The national flower of India, the lotus, is common in lakes and ponds.

Impatiens sulcata in the Valley of Flowers
Fungi[edit]
One-third of the fungal diversity of the globe exists in India. Only a fraction of the fungi of India have been subjected to scientific scrutiny. Over 27,000 species have been recorded in India, making it the largest biotic community after insects. About 205 genera have been described from India, of which 32% were discovered by C. V. Subramanian of the University of Madras.[18][19]

Conservation[edit]
Main article: Conservation in India
The Denison barb is endemic to only three rivers in the Western Ghats
Article 48 of the Constitution of India says, "The state shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country" and Article 51-A states that "it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers, and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures."[20]  The committee in the Indian Board for Wildlife, in their report, defines wildlife as "the entire natural uncultivated flora and fauna of the country" while the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 defines it as "any animal, bees, butterflies, crustacea, fish, moths and aquatic or land vegetation which forms part of any habitat."[21]
Despite the various environmental issues, the country still has rich and varied wildlife.[21]
As of 2020, there are 981 protected areas including 106 national parks, 566 wildlife sanctuaries, 97 conservation reserves and 214 community reserves. In addition there are 51 tiger reserves, 18 biosphere reserves and 32 elephant reserves.[citation needed]
Hundreds of India's bird species are in serious decline, according to a study spanning over 25 years.[22]
In 2020 the Indian government created the world's first sea cucumber reserve in Lakshadweep – Dr KK Mohammed Koya Sea Cucumber Conservation Reserve, the largest marine conservation reserve – Attakoya Thangal Marine Reserve and the first protected area for marine birds in India – PM Sayeed Marine Birds Conservation Reserve.[23]
Gir forest in India has the only surviving population of Asiatic lions in the world. In the late 1960s, there were only about 180 Asiatic lions. There were more than 600 Asiatic lions in Gir National Park in 2018.[24]

Extinctions in recent times[edit]
Some bird species have gone extinct in recent times, including the pink-headed duck (Rhodonessa caryophyllacea) and the Himalayan quail (Ophrysia superciliosa). The large-billed reed warbler (Acrocephalus orinus), known from a single specimen collected by Allan Octavian Hume from near Rampur in Himachal Pradesh, was rediscovered in Thailand after 139 years.[25][26]
The Asiatic cheetah became extinct in India in the 1950. India's last recorded cheetah in the wild was said to have been shot in the Rewa area of Madhya Pradesh in the late 1940s.

Cultural influence[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Brahminy kite is considered as the contemporary representation of Garuda, the sacred bird of Vishnu
The varied and rich wildlife of India has had a profound impact on the region's culture. India's wildlife has been the subject of numerous tales and fables such as the Panchatantra and the Jataka Tales. Notions of the wildlife of India were introduced in the west and made famous in late 1800s by Rudyard Kipling, especially through The Jungle Book.

National animals[edit]
Indian peacock
National animal: tiger
National heritage animal: Indian elephant
National aquatic animal: South Asian river dolphin[27]
National bird: Indian peacock
National reptile: king cobra
Biosphere reserves[edit]
The Indian government has established 18 biosphere reserves, which protect larger areas of natural habitat and often include one or more national parks or reserves, along with buffer zones that are open to some economic uses. Protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of the protected region, but also to the human communities who inhabit these regions, and their ways of life.[citation needed]
The protected areas are:

Achanakmar Wildlife Sanctuary
Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve
Dibru-Saikhowa National Park
Dihang-Dibang Biosphere Reserve
Great Nicobar Biosphere Reserve
Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park
Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary
Khangchendzonga National Park
Manas National Park
Nanda Devi National Park
Nilgiri Mountains
Nokrek National Park
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve
Simlipal National Park
Sundarbans National Park
Cold Desert
Seshachalam Hills
Panna National Park
Eleven of the eighteen biosphere reserves are a part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, based on the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme (MAB) list.[28]

Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve
Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve
Nokrek National Park
Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve
Simlipal National Park
Sundarbans Biosphere Reserve
Achanakmar-Amarkantak Biosphere Reserve
Nicobar Islands
Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve
Qureshi Tribe Biosphere Reserve
Khangchendzonga
See also[edit]
Birding in Chennai
Birdwatchers' Field Club of Bangalore
Endemic birds of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands
India Nature Watch
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
List of birds of India
List of mammals of India
List of reptiles of South Asia
Van Vigyan Kendra
Wildlife population of India
References[edit]


^ a b Indira Gandhi Conservation Monitoring Centre (IGCMC), New Delhi and the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Cambridge, UK.  2001. Biodiversity profile for India

^ Stephen, A.; Suresh, R. & Livingstone, C. (2015). "Indian Biodiversity: Past, Present and Future". International Journal of Environment and Natural Sciences. 7: 13–28.

^ "CEPF.net - The Biodiversity Hotspots". www.cepf.net. Retrieved 5 March 2017.

^ Timesnow news (28 June 2020). "India's 'first' lichen park in Uttarakhand to conserve Jurassic era plant". Retrieved 18 July 2020.

^ K. Praveen Karach. (2006). Out-of-India Gondwanan origin of some tropical Asian biota

^ a b Tritsch, M.E.  2001. Wildlife of India Harper Collins, London. 192 pages. ISBN 0-00-711062-6

^ Groombridge, B. (ed). 1993. The 1994 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals. IUCN, England, Switzerland and Cambridge, UK. lvi + 286 pp.

^ Baskaran, N. & Desai, A. A. (1996). "Ranging behaviour of the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve, South India" (PDF). SSC Asian Elephant Specialist Group. 15: 41–57.

^ Choudhury, A. U. (1985). "Distribution of Indian one-horned rhinoceros". Tiger Paper. 12 (2): 25–30.

^ Jhala, Y. V.; Qureshi, Q.; Nayak, A. K. (2019). Status of tigers, co-predators and prey in India 2018. Summary Report. TR No./2019/05. New Delhi, Dehradun: National Tiger Conservation Authority & Wildlife Institute of India.

^ Singh, H. S. & Gibson, L. (2011). "A conservation success story in the otherwise dire megafauna extinction crisis: The Asiatic lion (Panthera leo persica) of Gir forest" (PDF). Biological Conservation. 144 (5): 1753–1757. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.02.009.

^ Mondal, K.; Gupta, S.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Qureshi, Q. & K. Sankar (2012). "Prey selection, food habits and dietary overlap between leopard Panthera pardus (Mammalia: Carnivora) and re-introduced tiger Panthera tigris (Mammalia: Carnivora) in a semi-arid forest of Sariska Tiger Reserve, Western India". Italian Journal of Zoology. 79 (4): 607–616. doi:10.1080/11250003.2012.687402.

^ Mishra, C. (1997). "Livestock depredation by large carnivores in the Indian trans-Himalaya: conflict perceptions and conservation prospects" (PDF). Environmental Conservation. 24 (4): 338–343. doi:10.1017/S0376892997000441.

^ Choudhury, A. U. (1992). "The Clouded Leopard in Assam". Oryx. 27 (1): 51–53. doi:10.1017/s0030605300023966.

^ "7 Rare and Exotic Wildlife Species that can be found in India". 19 June 2015.

^ "Animals in Indian Sub-Continent". Archived from the original on 2 March 2022.

^ Botanical Survey of India. 1983

^ Manoharachary, C.; Sridhar, K.; Singh, R.; Adholeya, A.; Suryanarayanan, T. S.; Rawat, S. & Johri, B.N. (2005). "Fungal biodiversity: Distribution, conservation and prospecting of fungi from India" (PDF). Current Science. 89 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2017.

^ Fungi of India 1989-2001 "Fungal biodiversity: Distribution, conservation and prospecting of fungi from India".

^ Krausman, P. R. & Johnson, A. T. (1990) Conservation and wildlife education in India. Wild. Soc. Bull. 18: 342–347

^ a b Singh, M. P.; Singh, J. K.; Mohanka, R. (2007). Forest Environment and Biodiversity. Daya Publishing House. pp. 116–118. ISBN 9788170354215.

^ "India's bird populations 'declining sharply', research shows". 18 February 2020.

^ Badri Chatterjee (29 February 2020). "World's first sea cucumber conservation area in Lakshadweep". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 23 July 2020.

^ "India's endangered lion population increases to 600". m.phys.org. Retrieved 12 November 2019.

^ Threatened birds of Asia [1] Archived 13 October 2006 at the Wayback Machine Accessed October 2006

^ The Nation, 6 March 2007

^ "Dolphin becomes India's national aquatic animal". Archived from the original on 8 October 2009.

^ UNESCO, Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme list


Further reading[edit]
Saravanan, Velayutham. Environmental History of Modern India: Land, Population, Technology and Development (Bloomsbury Publishing India, 2022) online review
Prasad, S.N.; Ramachanandra, T.V.; Ahalya, N.; Sengupta, T.; Kumar, A.; Tiwari, A.K.; Vijayan, V.S. & Vijayan, L. (2002). "Conservation of wetlands of India – a review". Tropical Ecology. 43 (1): 173–186. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.526.3559.
Manoharachary, C.; Sridhar, K.; Singh, R.; Adholeya, A.; Suryanarayanan, T. S.; Rawat, S. & Johri, B.N. (2005). "Fungal biodiversity: Distribution, conservation and prospecting of fungi from India" (PDF). Current Science. 89 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2017.
Jamaluddin, M.G.; Goswami; B.M. Ojha (2004). Fungi of India 1989–2001. Scientific Publishers. ISBN 8172333544.
External links[edit]
Official website of: Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests
"Legislations on Environment, Forests, and Wildlife" from the Official website of: Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests
"India's Forest Conservation Legislation: Acts, Rules, Guidelines", from the official website of the Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests
Wildlife Legislations, including - "The Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act" from the Official website of: Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests
vteGeography of IndiaGeology
Fossil Parks
Geology of India
Indian Plate
Heritage
National Geological Monuments of India
Sacred groves of India
Sacred mountains of India
Sacred rivers of India
Stones of India
Landforms
Beaches
Borders
Canals
Desert
ECZ
Extreme points
Glaciers
Highest point by states
Islands
Lakes
Mountains
Mountain passes
Rivers
Valleys
Volcanoes
Waterfalls
Plains
Indo-Gangetic
Eastern Coastal
Western Coastal
Regions
North India
Northeast India
East India
South India
West India
Central India
Subdivisions
States and territories
Autonomous areas
Divisions
Districts
Cities
Towns
Municipalities
Environment and climate
Biogeographic classification
Ecoregions
Biospheres
Fauna
Flora
Forests
Issues
Protected Areas
Wildlife
See also
National monuments of India
National parks of India
Nature worship in Indian-origin religions
World Heritage Sites in India
Climate of India
Culture of India
Environment of India
History of India
Tourism in India

vteWildlife of Asia Sovereign states
Afghanistan
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
East Timor (Timor-Leste)
Egypt
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
North Korea
South Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia
Maldives
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman
Pakistan
Philippines
Qatar
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
Vietnam
Yemen
States withlimited recognition
Abkhazia
Artsakh
Northern Cyprus
Palestine
South Ossetia
Taiwan
Dependencies andother territories
British Indian Ocean Territory
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Hong Kong
Macau

 Category
 Asia portal

vte Tourism in IndiaBy state
Highest points of each state
Andhra Pradesh
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Assam
Bihar
Delhi
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Haryana
Karnataka
Kerala
Ladakh
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Mizoram
Northeast India
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Telangana
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
By city
Aurangabad
Bangalore
Chennai
Coimbatore
Hyderabad
Jaipur
Kolkata
Kozhikode
Lucknow
Madurai
Mumbai
Mysore
Patna
Prayagraj
Surat
Tiruchirappalli
Udaipur
Vellore
Vijayawada
Types
Hindi cinema
International Film Festival of India
Mumbai Film City
Hydrabad Ramoji Film City
Borders of India
Border ceremonies
Border markets
Border crossings
List of extreme points of India
Bridges
Historical bridges
Chenab Rail Bridge
Living root bridges
Longest bridges overall
Longest above water
Diaspora and colonial past
Anglo-Indians
Old China Market, Kolkata
French India
Pondicherry
Karaikal
Yanaon
Mahe
Korean India
Memorial of Heo Hwang-ok
Portuguese India
Goa
Daman and Diu
Tibetan India
Dharamshala
Majnu-ka-tilla
X of India
Switzerland of India
Auli
Barot
Gulmarg
Kausani
Khajjiar
Manipur
Venice of India
Alappuzha
Grand Canyon of India
Gandikota
Niagara Falls of India
Chitrakote Falls
Scotland of India
Coorg
List of festivals in India
Fairs: Melās
Annual rural Olympics of India: Qila Raipur Sports Festival
Festival of ancient LGBT rituals: Koovagam temple festival
Festival of bull running: Jallikattu
Festival of cannabis: Ambubachi Mela, Hola Mohalla, Holi, Maha Shivaratri
Festival of colors: Holi
Festival of colorful: Lathmar Holi
Festival of dance: Garba
Festival of divine knowledge: Gita Mahotsav
Festival of girl child worship: Kanya Puja
Festival of human pyramids: Dahi Handi
Festival of the Indus river: Sindhu Darshan Festival
Festival of kite flying: Uttarayana
Festival of knowledge ad arts worship: Saraswati pouja
Festival of lights: Diwali
Festival of siblings: Raksha Bandhan
Festival of snake boat races: Vallam kali
National festivals: Public holidays in India
World's largest fair with 50 million attendees: Kumbh Mela
Festivals of arts and culture
Delhi Queer Pride Parade
Desert Festival of sand dunes
Rann Utsav
Surajkund International Crafts Mela
Food tourism
Cuisine by states
Tea estate tourism
Munnar
Darjeeling
Kalimpong
Food
Paan
Panipuri
Drinks
Bhang lassi
Desi daru
Indian whisky
Indian beer
Old Monk rum
Kasauli Brewery, the oldest brewery in India
Geological heritage sites
Magnetic hills
Caves of Meghalaya
Ghat Roads
Himalayas
Western Ghats
Tallest mountains
Historical and Archaeological
Archaeological sites
Archaeoastronomical sites
Ashoka pillars
Bhimbetka
Cave temples
Cave paintings
Colossal in situ sculptures
Dolmens
Forts
Fossil
Havelis
India Gate
IVC sites
Menhirs
Monuments
Museums
National heritage sites
Rrock-cut temples
World heritage sites
Stepwells
Nature
Beaches
Caves
Caves of Maharashtra
Coral reefs
Caves of Meghalaya
Hill stations
Highest points of each state

Islands
Floating islands of Loktak Lake
Floating island of Prashar Lake

Lakes
Chilika Lake
Roopkund lake of skeletons
Floating islands of Loktak Lake
Floating island of Prashar Lake

Mountains
Rice terraces of Himalayas
Scenic Ghat roads
Waterfalls

Wildlife
National parks
Protected areas
Sacred groves of India
Largest tree span of the world
Railway
Aerial tramways
Luxury trains
UNESCO Heritage Mountain railways
UNESCO Heritage Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus
Matheran Hill Railway
Indian religions
Buddhism
Hinduism
Jainism
Sikhism
Indian religious festivals
Hindu festivals
Buddhist festivals
Jain festivals
Sikh festivals
Pilgrim yatras
Parikrama pilgrim circuits
Pilgrimage sites
Sacred ghats
Sacred girl child as living goddesses
Sacred groves
Sacred mountains
Sacred rivers
Sacred trees
Golden Temple

Varanasi
Akhara
Kashi Vishwanath Temple
Manikarnika Ghat cremation pyres
Naga sadhu
Foreign religions in India

Baháʼí
Baháʼí Faith in India
Lotus Temple
Zoroastrianism
Zoroastrianism in India
Judaism
Bene Ephraim
Bene Israel
Bnei Menashe
Cochin Jews
Desi Jews
Meshuchrarim
Paradesi Jews
Sephardic Jews in India
Novelty
Kargil Maitreya Buddhas
Malana valley
Hindu weddings
Haunted ruined city of Kuldhara
Haunted and wild leopards's den of Bhangarh Fort
Banyan trees
World's highest race
Valley of Flowers
Temple for rats
Ancient Veerabhadra Temple
Specialty
Aerial tramways
Atomic tourism and Pokhran
Ayurvedic tourism
Golden Triangle
Medical tourism
New 7 Wonders
Sex tourism
Yoga tourism
Sport
Royal Enfield biking
Car Rally
Cricket
Mountaineering
Skiing
Great Tibetan Marathon
Ladakh Marathon
Statues
Equestrian
Most famous
Tallest
Tallest structures
Buildings
Structures
Kalisindh Thermal Power Station 202 m
Statue of Unity 182 m
Gopuram 76 m
Tallest towers
Rameswaram TV Tower 323 m
Jaisalmer TV Tower 300 m
Samatra TV Tower 300 m
Pitampura TV Tower 235 m
War memorials
National
Military
Police
Southern Command
Amar Jawan Jyoti
India Gate
Kargil
Organisations
India Tourism Development Corporation
Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation
Assam Tourism Development Corporation
Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation
Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation
Gujarat Tourism
Haryana Tourism Corporation
Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Development Corporation
Kerala Tourism Development Corporation
Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation
Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation
Odisha Tourism Development Corporation
Rajasthan Tourism Development Corporation
Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation
Telangana State Tourism Development Corporation
Uttar Pradesh Tourism
West Bengal Tourism Development Corporation
See also
Incredible India
Atithi Devo Bhava
Namaste
Indianisation
Indosphere
Sanskritisation
Sarva Dharma Sama Bhava
Indian diaspora
Visa policy of India

 Category
 Commons





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_India&oldid=1169954217"
Categories: Wildlife of IndiaWildlife by countryBiota of IndiaHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksArticles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse dmy dates from January 2016Use Indian English from June 2016All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2022Articles needing more detailed referencesArticles needing additional references from February 2022All articles needing additional referencesArticles with unsourced statements from January 2022
